---
title: On a Super Hostile Series, and How I Should Relate to It
author: Daniel Seita
layout: post
permalink: /2012/08/22/on-a-super-hostile-series-and-how-i-should-relate-to-it/
categories:
  - Computer Science
tags:
  - machine learning
  - Minecraft
  - specialization
---

<img src="{{site.url}}/assets/vechs.png" alt="vechs">

I might have mentioned this before, but to reiterate, I&#8217;m a huge fan of the sandbox computer
game [Minecraft][1]. (That game and Sid Meier&#8217;s Civilization IV: Beyond the Sword currently
take up about 95% of my gaming time.)

Today, I want to focus on one aspect of Minecraft, which is *map making*. Using a variety of third
party world editing utilities, such as [World Edit][2], players can generate gigantic, epic-looking
buildings, landscapes, and other structures that would otherwise be too burdensome or impossible to
build by hand. And when they&#8217;re satisfied with the quality of their map, players can upload
their creation online to allow others to play it.

*And there&#8217;s one mapmaker who has turned into a superstar.*

That person would be Vechs. His [Super Hostile series][3] has become the most popular custom-made
map or map series of all time, with well over a million total downloads, countless videos of his
maps on YouTube, and spawning a new generation of Minecraft map makers who aspire to create similar
maps as he. I&#8217;ve put a screenshot of the forums on August 16, which indicates that his topic
has over *three times as many replies *as the one with the Skyblock map. Click for a larger view.

Whenever he updates or uploads a new map, hundreds of players download his map on the same day. He
has become so good that Minecraft fans couldn&#8217;t ignore him. In fact, even a few developers of
the game [tried out his map][4]. (They didn&#8217;t succeed.) Vechs&#8217; source of map
making success comes from creating essentially a new genre of Minecraft, called Complete the
Monument [CTM] maps. Vechs started his series by making a variety of adventure maps where players
could play like an ordinary Minecraft map.

*But his series didn&#8217;t start to take of until he added the salient feature of a Victory
Monument.* Players now have to gather 19 different blocks scattered around his maps to successfully
&#8220;complete the monument&#8221; and beat the map. The catch is that those blocks tend to be
heavily guarded by enemies and ingenuous traps, hence the naming &#8220;Super Hostile.&#8221; To put
things in perspective, beating the most difficult maps in his series is orders of magnitude more
difficult than playing through a normally generated Minecraft map on hard difficulty.

So why am I discussing about him now? And why is this entry filed under computer science[^update]?

I think I see a deep connection between what he&#8217;s done and what I hope to achieve in my
computer science research. Substitute &#8220;Minecraft&#8221; for &#8220;computer science&#8221; and
&#8220;Map Making&#8221; with any field of computer science, and my point gets clearer.

Vechs took a field of Minecraft &#8212; mapmaking &#8212; and specialized in one thing, CTM maps.
His experience has unequivocally made him the current world expert on creating those kind of maps.
There are other &#8220;fields&#8221; of Minecraft that people can become famous in. Examples include
creating &#8220;Let&#8217;s Play&#8221; Youtube videos, popular modpacks, creative mode structure
work &#8230; the list goes on. But stripping away most of his other options let Vechs maximize his
focus on the one aspect that made him famous in the Minecraft world. His latest maps show
significant improvement over the first few, indicating that even the best have room for improvement.
But he needed *time* to practice on his map making skills before he got really good at it.

So what should I do?

Right now, simply based on my current research experience, my favorite field of computer science is
machine learning. So over the next year, unless I suddenly experience an epiphany and fall in love
with complexity theory, I should aim to learn as much machine learning as possible. Consequently,
that will be the topic I hope to explore in my next REU project. And since I&#8217;m actually taking
a course in machine learning in the spring 2013 semester, I know which of my four spring classes I
should expend the most effort towards.

That is my mindset. I want to eventually get to the cusp of current knowledge in one field (not two,
not three) of computer science &#8212; machine learning. Then, I hope to make an impact by making *a
leap* in my field. As [others have noticed][5], that&#8217;s how many new discoveries are made.
Vechs created a &#8220;leap&#8221; in the map making community by inspiring a new genre of maps.
Hopefully, I can help create generations of future research projects.

 [^update]: Well, it *was* filed under computer science, under the old blog system (before May 15, 2015).
 [1]: http://minecraft.net
 [2]: http://wiki.sk89q.com/wiki/WorldEdit
 [3]: http://www.minecraftforum.net/topic/191908-ctmcollection-vechs-super-hostile-series/
 [4]: http://www.twitch.tv/marc_irl/b/327541820
 [5]: http://www.amazon.com/Creativity-Understanding-Innovation-Invention-ebook/dp/B0032Z8KBQ/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&s=digital-text&qid=1268662299&sr=8-2
