---
title: Why I am Against Affirmative Action
author: Daniel Seita
layout: post
permalink: /2014/12/31/why-i-am-against-affirmative-action/
geo_public:
  - 0
categories:
  - Everything Else
tags:
  - affirmative action
  - Clarence Thomas
  - college admissions
  - faculty hiring
  - Sonia Sotomayor
---
**Update 1/1/2015:** Happy 2015 everyone! I read Ta-Nehisi Coates&#8217; article [The Case for
Reparations][1], which talks about affirmative action a little bit but mostly is about the
unfortunate news that, even after slavery ended and after the civil rights era, African Americans
are really *not* equal to whites, a claim that I agree with wholeheartedly. I was surprised and
devastated when he described how Congress failed to even *consider* the possibility of providing any
form of reparations. Sadly, as the years go by, the likelihood of making substantial or meaningful
reparations declines. Consider the payments to Japanese-Americans who were deported to camps in
World War II. (Had I lived in California as a child at that time, I might have been among those
people.) But at least some of those victims were able to get reparations *during their lifetime*.
The question of how to do the same for African Americans is much trickier.

Coates&#8217; article brings up affirmative action in several contexts. One is when President Barack
Obama said that his children should *not* benefit from that policy, so I have another supporter
there that I didn&#8217;t list in my original article. The second is that affirmative action is a
tricky policy because there is no clear definition of it (I agree), and Coates appears to be
doubtful about affirmative action&#8217;s effectiveness in reaching equality among blacks and whites
(and Asians?).

When I was reading Coates&#8217; article, I kept thinking about ways to boost minority enrollment in
STEM. One effective way, I think, would be to implement affirmative action-like policies not for
career positions, but for temporary programs that are sort of &#8220;breeding grounds&#8221; for
such careers or college positions. For instance, many affluent families send their high school
children to math and science summer programs. I believe if those programs made conscious efforts to
reach out to minorities, or if there were even programs that *only* accepted minorities, that could
serve to be a better place to practice such affirmative action-like policies. *I* was able to
benefit from a program like that, and I think I know a few others like this, but it&#8217;s going to
take years to see a difference in the racial and gender diversity among academics because of the
scarcity of positions and the tenure aspect (which means the previous generation sticks around for
decades).

That&#8217;s all I have to say for this (first) update. **Here is my original post:**

Affirmative action is the process of giving favoritism in some way (usually for employment) to
groups of disadvantaged people who have historically been victims of discrimination. Affirmative
action policies vary according to country. In the United States, having a pure quota on making sure
that X percent of a workforce belongs to a certain group is illegal, but affirmative action does
exist. I would like to present an argument against this policy based on one simple idea, though I
should first add the disclaimer that I do not think I have benefited from it or will benefit from in
the future. The only way I would is if some employer wants to hire a deaf person, but I rarely see
this discussed in the two cases that I&#8217;m familiar with: college admissions, and faculty
recruitment in STEM fields. Discussions about the lack of diversity in STEM are dominated around
women, African Americans and Hispanics. It annoys me that people with disabilities are often
ignored, but maybe I should talk about that later.

I am against affirmative action mostly because *it often makes the people who benefit from
affirmative action feel like the reason why they were hired is because of affirmative action, and
not due to merit*. (There&#8217;s also the real problem of resentment over those who think they
aren&#8217;t getting their jobs, but I think that is less important.) Over the past few years, I
have become far more sensitive to issues regarding race and gender, and I have learned about
countless stories from people who have lamented how others view them as an &#8220;affirmative action
hire.&#8221; Of these stories, the one that stuck to me the most was of current Supreme Court
[Justice Clarence Thomas][2], who would constantly remark that others stigmatized his Yale law
degree as the *product of affirmative action rather than his own merit*:

> Affirmative action (though it wasn&#8217;t yet called that) had become a fact of like at American
> college and universities, and before long I realized that those blacks who benefited from it were
> being judged by a double standard. As much as it stung to be told that I&#8217;d done well in the
> seminary DESPITE my race, it was far worse to feel that I was now at Yale BECAUSE of it. I sought
> to vanquish the perception that I was somehow inferior to my white classmates by obtaining special
> permission to carry more than the maximum number of credit hours and by taking a rigorous
> curriculum of courses in such traditional areas as corporate law, bankruptcy, and commercial
> transactions. How could anyone dare to doubt my abilities if I excelled in such demanding classes?

One more recent story was from [Professor Carlotta Berry&#8217;s recent New York Times editorial][3], where she said that she wants to be viewed professionally, but understands that some may view her faculty hiring as a product of affirmative action, even as she points out, she does not believe she benefited from it.

> Having worked with thousands of students, I know for a fact that for many — though by no means all, or even most — there is already a presumption that I, as a female and African-American, am less qualified than my white male colleagues, or at the very least that I was hired in order to meet a double minority quota. And I get it — anti-affirmative-action ideologues have managed to not only demolish the legitimacy of that policy, but tar the reputation of anyone who might have benefited from it (even if, like me, they did not).

Here&#8217;s another perspective from a non-beneficiary (I think) by Professor David Aldous of Berkeley, who defended the merit of the statistics faculty members when [asked about affirmative action at Berkeley][4]:

<div class="page" title="Page 17">
  <div class="layoutArea">
    <div class="column">
      <blockquote>
        <p>
          But putting aside the cynical view, here&#8217;s the bottom line. There are the various cultural pressures we all recognize that traditionally have reduced the number of women and minorities in math and science. Almost nobody objects to the principle of trying to counteract these pressures, but it&#8217;s the bureaucratic hassles involved in conforming to rules that create the cynicism. In my Stat department, we have maybe 5 out of 20-odd faculty being women, and they&#8217;re all perceived as having been hired on merit, not because of affirmative action. As for minorities, at the faculty level there are so few that it&#8217;s not on the radar.
        </p>
      </blockquote>
      
      <p>
        I absolutely agree with him on all counts here. The statistics faculty here at Berkeley are amazing (all of them), and I would love to help reduce the cultural pressures and barriers to STEM for women and minorities.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        At Berkeley, undergraduate admissions is race-blind, and one African American student is happy about this because <a href="http://www.eastbayexpress.com/oakland/why-black-students-are-avoiding-uc-berkeley/Content?oid=3756649&showFullText=true">she got in on merit rather than affirmative action</a>:
      </p>
      
      <blockquote>
        <p>
          &#8220;I got into Berkeley on my own,&#8221; said Nile Taylor, who entered Cal three years after the ban on affirmative action began. &#8220;I didn&#8217;t get in because they had to meet a quota. I got in because my application was good enough to get into Berkeley. Part of the stigma of people who get in under affirmative action is one, they only got in because of affirmative action — that they&#8217;re not considered to be good enough otherwise — and two, I think affirmative action is a Band-Aid. I don&#8217;t think it&#8217;s a solution.&#8221;
        </p>
      </blockquote>
      
      <p>
        I believe these stories reinforce my argument. If there was no affirmative action, I don&#8217;t think there would be a need to constantly defend a woman or minority admission or hire on merit. (Note: &#8220;minorities&#8221; here do not include Asians; Berkeley has plenty of Asian professors.)
      </p>
      
      <p>
        Whenever I think about a contentious issue, I often try to understand the opposite perspective: how would I feel if I were someone who clearly is a <em>possible beneficiary</em> of affirmative action? And I believe that I would still agree with my thoughts here. If I were to eventually become a professor or work at some of the many industry alternatives (Google, Microsoft, etc.) I would <em>never</em> want to feel like I was hired on the basis of race or gender. It would make me feel inadequate, and also make me feel guilty about taking away spots from potentially qualified people. Academic jobs are especially scarce nowadays, and there&#8217;s no need to increase tension among applicants by forcing affirmative action as a policy.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        An argument in favor of affirmative action might be that it helps minorities by increasing the pool of &#8220;similar&#8221; people (never mind the danger in lumping people together in a group), thus resulting in increased productivity and expertise in the classroom or workforce. For instance, someone who is the only minority in a class might have to work by himself/herself all the time due to social exclusion, but with more minorities, then this increases the pool of people who are easier to work with, which therefore results in better grades, better job performance, etc. I&#8217;m a little skeptical of this perspective, because it <em>still</em> carries some stigma. Realize that I say this as someone who has felt excluded from other students in all levels of my education.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/23/us/supreme-court-michigan-affirmative-action-ban.html">Justice Sonia Sotomayor provided other arguments in support of affirmative action</a> when the Supreme Court backed Michigan&#8217;s ban on the policy in its public university admissions. One of them was about other aspects of college admissions:
      </p>
      
      <blockquote>
        <p>
          Athletes, children of alumni and students from underrepresented parts of the state, she said, remained free to try to persuade university officials to give their applications special weight.
        </p>
      </blockquote>
      
      <p>
        I agree that this is a problem. I am also against athletes, alumni, and those from underrepresented geographical locations getting special weight from the holistic college admissions process, <em>but</em> I do not think these aspects carry as much stigma as affirmative action does, and the point of my argument is that I&#8217;m trying to <em>reduce</em> the stigma associated with the policy as much as possible. Again, here&#8217;s a disclaimer: I was neither an athlete, nor an alumni, nor from an underrepresented geographical location when I applied to college. I lived in New York, which is probably the most over-represented state in many northeastern schools, but I somehow still got in Williams, and I am not sure if there was anyone who thought I got in for reasons other than merit. I don&#8217;t want the opposite perspective &#8212; that admission was a product of affirmative action &#8212; to hold true for me or anyone else.
      </p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

 [1]: http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/05/the-case-for-reparations/361631/
 [2]: http://www.ontheissues.org/Court/Clarence_Thomas_Civil_Rights.htm
 [3]: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/02/opinion/sunday/they-call-me-doctor-berry.html
 [4]: https://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~aldous/Misc/interview_2011.pdf
