---
layout: post
title:  "My Three Favorite Books I Read in 2015"
date:   2015-12-28 23:59:00
permalink: 2015-12-28-my-three-favorite-books-i-read-in-2015/
---

As the year 2015 wraps up, I've been reviewing my New Year's Resolution document. Yes, I do keep
one; it's on my laptop's home screen so I see it every time I start my computer. No, I unfortunately
did not manage to accomplish anything remotely close to my original goals.

I *did*, however, read more books this year than I did in previous years. I was a committed gamer
back in high school and college and I'm trying to transition from playing games to reading books in
my free time (in addition to blogging, of course).

In this post, I would like to briefly share some thoughts on three of my favorite books I read this
year: *Guns, Germs, and Steel*, *The Ideas that Conquered the World*, and (yes, sorry) *The God
Delusion*.

## Guns, Germs, and Steel

*Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies*, by Jared Diamond, is a [1998 Pulitzer Prize-
Winning (General Nonfiction)][1] book about, essentially, how human societies came to be the way
they are today. It aims to answer the question: Why did Eurasians conquer, displace, or decimate
Native Americans, Australians, and Africans, instead of the reverse?

The white supremacists, of course, would say it's because Caucasians are superior to other
races, but Diamond completely eviscerates that kind of thinking by presenting strong geographic and
environmental factors that led to Eurasia's early dominance. Upon the age of exploration, it was
Europe which contained the most technologically advanced and most powerful countries in the world.
(Interestingly enough, this was *not* always the case in the world; Australia and China had their
turns as being the most advanced countries in the world.) That European explorers had guns were not
the main reason why they conquered the Americas, though: it was because they were immune to diseases
such as smallpox that decimated the native populations.

I learned *a lot* from this book. Seriously, a lot. The book was full of seemingly unimportant
factors that turned out to have a major impact on the world today, such as the north-south shape of
the Americas versus the east-west nature of Eurasia. While I was reading the book, I kept repeating
to myself: *wow, that argument should have been obvious in hindsight*, an indication that the book
was effectively supporting its hypotheses. I felt a little uncomfortable when Diamond had to add
several disclaimers in the book that it was not going to be "a racist treatise" but unfortunately
that text is probably still necessary in today's world.

A negative effect of reading this book was that, since it deals with the growth of human
civilizations, it made me want to play some Civilization IV, but never mind. This was a great book.

## The Ideas that Conquered the World

*The Ideas That Conquered The World: Peace, Democracy, and Free Markets in the Twenty-first
Century*, by Michael Mandelbaum is a 2002 book that reviews the state of Western values at the start
of the 21st century. If one compares life today to what it was like during the Cold War and earlier,
some of the most remarkable trends are that countries heavily prefer peace as the basis of foreign
policy, democracy as the basis of political life, and free markets as the basis of economic growth.
Mandelbaum explains how these trends occurred by providing an overview of how countries previously
conducted internal and foreign affairs from 1800 to the present. He particularly analyzes the impact
of World War I, World War II, and the Cold War on liberal values.

There are many interesting themes repeated in this book. One is that Germany and Japan serve as the
ultimate examples of how previously backward countries can catch up to the world leaders by adopting
liberal policies. Another is that there are three "dangerous" regions in the world that could
threaten peace, democracy, and free markets: the Middle East, Russia, and China, since those
countries wield considerable power but have not completely adopted liberal principles. (In 2015,
with all the terrorism, oil, and migrant crises in the Middle East, along with America's diplomatic
tensions with Russia and China, I can say that Mandelbaum's assessment was really spot on!) A third
theme is that much of the world has actually become *less* peaceful after the Cold War, a
consequence of how the core countries now have fewer incentives to protect those countries on the
periphery.

Of the three books here, this one is probably the least well-known, but I still tremendously enjoyed
reading it. I now have a better understanding about why there is so much debate over government size 
in American politics. The role of the government in a free market society should be to let the
market function normally, except that it should provide a social safety net and other services to
protect the worst effects of the market. How much and to what extent those services should be
provided is at the heart of the liberal versus conservative debate. As a side note: I find it
really interesting how "liberal" is related to the free market, yet the stereotype in today's
politics is that *conservatives*, not "liberals" as in "Democrats", are the biggest free market
supporters. That's vastly oversimplifying, but it's interesting how this terminology came to be.

Oh, I should mention that this book *also* made me want to play Civilization IV. Perhaps I should
stop reading foreign policy books? That brings me to the third book ...

## The God Delusion

*The God Delusion*, by Richard Dawkins, is a 2006 book arguing that it is exceedingly unlikely for
there to be a God, and that there are many inconsistencies, problems, and harmful effects of
religion. This is easily the most controversial of the three books I've listed here, for obvious
reasons; a reviewer said: "Bible-thumpers doubtless will declare they've found their Satan
incarnate".

Dawkins is a well-known evolutionary biologist but is even more well-known for being the world's
prominent atheist. In *The God Delusion*, Dawkins presents a spectrum of seven different levels of
beliefs in God, starting from: (1) *Strong theist. 100 per cent probability of God. In the words of
C.G. Jung, 'I do not believe, I know'* to (7) *Strong atheist.  'I know there is no God, with the
same conviction as Jung "knows" there is one.'*.

Both Dawkins and I classify ourselves as "6" on his scale: *Very low probability, but short of zero.
De facto atheist. 'I cannot know for certain but I think God is very improbable, and I live my life
on the assumption that he is not there'*. I also agree with him that, due to the nature of how
atheists think, it would be difficult to find people who honestly identify as falling in category 7,
despite how it's the polar opposite of "1" in his scale, which is *very* populated.

This book goes over the common arguments that people claim for the existence of God, with Dawkins
systematically pointing out numerous fallacies. He also argues that much of what people claim about
God (e.g., "how can anyone but God produce all these species today?") can really be attributed to a
one-time event, *plus* the cumulative nature of evolution. In addition, Dawkins discusses the many
perils of religion, about how it leads to war, terrorism, discrimination, and other destructive
practices. For an obvious example, look at how many Catholics have a negative and inflexible view of
homosexuals and homosexuality. Or for something even worse, look at ISIS.

*The God Delusion* ended up mostly reinforcing what I had already known, and expresses arguments in
a cleaner way than I could have ever managed. This brings up the question: why did I already
identify as being in category 6 on Dawkins' scale? The reason is simple: I have never personally
experienced any event in my life that would *remotely* indicate the presence of God. If the day were
to come when I *do* see a God, then ... I'll start believing in God, with the defense that, earlier,
I was simply thinking critically and making a conclusion based on sound evidence.  After all, I'm a
"6", not a "7".

Dawkins, thank you for writing this book.

[1]: http://www.pulitzer.org/citation/1998-General-Nonfiction
