---
layout: post
title:  "My Prediction on the 2016 Presidential Election"
date:   2015-10-25 12:00:00
permalink: 2015-10-25-my-prediction-on-the-2016-presidential-election/
---

When I [briefly wrote about the 2016 US presidential
election](http://danieltakeshi.github.io/2015/04/11/the-missing-deaf-american-politician/) a few
months ago, my prediction on the Republican nominee fell completely flat. Scott Walker, who I
honestly thought had enough political credentials to satisfy the party leaders while avoiding the
"establishment"-like aura to appease the surprisingly large portion of Republican voters who want an
outsider, was actually the [*second* person to drop out of the group of
seventeen](http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2015/09/scott_walker_drops_out_why_the_wisconsin_governor_left_the_gop_primary.html),
*despite* how "candiadates" such as Jim Gilmore and George Pataki are still "running." The current
political classification of the Republican candidates looks like this, courtesy to
FiveThirtyEight[^dem]:

<img src="{{site.url}}/assets/silver-gop-five-ring-circus-0921.png" alt="venn_diagram">

That brings us to where we are today. At the risk of embarrassing myself in the future, I think
there are only three real candidates for the Republican nominee: Jeb Bush, John Kasich, and Marco
Rubio. I think Rubio will be the nominee, and furthermore, *that he will win the general election*
over Hillary Clinton. Note that I am not saying if I would *support* such an outcome; it is simply
what I would place my money on if I were betting.

Why do I think Rubio will be the nominee among the fifteen current Republican candidates? To help
answer that question, I have grouped up the candidates into four tiers, from least likely to most
likely to win the nomination. I also have a short summary of each tier. My explanations are *super
brief*, so apologies in advance to those who were expecting pages and pages of text. I don't know
enough about all of these people to write much about them, and you don't want to read a long blog
post.

First, let's look at the bottom tier.

* Jim Gilmore
* Lindsey Graham
* George Pataki
* Rick Santorum

Rather surprisingly, none of these guys stand a chance at winning, despite how they are currently or
have held prominent political positions. For one, they are all polling horribly. None of them have
made it to the first two "varsity" Republican debates, and it does not look like that will be
changing any time soon.

To discuss them individually: Gilmore is too unknown, Santorum's time was in 2012 and he's competing
with more popular religious politicians, Pataki is too liberal (he supports more forms of abortion
than is acceptable), and Graham ... I'm honestly not sure. I would have thought that Graham would be
an attractive candidate due to his detailed plans to fight ISIS, but I guess he may be a victim of
the wave of Republicans who despise current politicians?

Next, we have the Tier 3 list of candidates. These people still don't realistically have a chance of
becoming the nominee, but at least they are all better off than those in the bottom tier:

* Benjamin Carson
* Bobby Jindal
* Carly Fiorina
* Rand Paul
* Donald Trump

I debated putting the three outsiders (Carson, Fiorina, and Trump) in the bottom tier, but since
they're collectively polling so strong, they might as well be in sort of a "mid-tier" position. Some
of the recent polls have shown that more than half (!) of Republicans have one of these three as
their top option.

I should start by saying the rather obvious fact that Trump and Carson make too many incendiary
comments to realistically win the nominee. It's not the average Republican voter that ultimately
matters -- it's the *party leaders* who have power, and there is no way they will let one of those
two guys be the nominee. Nonetheless, Trump and Carson are polling so well that they can't be
ignored. I think it would be interesting, however, to see what would happen if it was only one of
those guys (say, Trump) against one of the Tier 4 guys (say, Graham). In a head-to-head race among
those two for the Republican nominee, I honestly think Graham would be the winner, or at the very
least, it wouldn't be a 25-to-1 loss like the current polls (in the inflated field) would suggest.

Fiorina is interesting. She is less popular than Trump and Carson, but [actually has an endorsement
from a
Representative](http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/presidential-races/254416-fiorina-picks-up-first-lawmaker-endorsement),
plus business experience (even if it may not be the greatest) to back up her credentials with the
establishment.

My addition of Bobby Jindal in this tier has to do with how I think Jindal is able to better appeal
to religions conservatives than Santorum. Finally, Rand Paul is here because he at least made it
made it to the first two varsity debates, but he seems to be languishing in the polls, so I don't
know how long that will last.

Now let's bring up Tier 2, where we have candidates with more than a shred of a chance of winning:

* Chris Christie
* Ted Cruz
* Mike Huckabee

Chris Christie used to be pretty popular with conservatives, but I think he actually has a net
*negative* rating among them now, which may be too much to overcome. His time to run was perhaps in
2012, and if he did become the nominee, I think Democrats would play "Bridgegate" ads over and over
again.

Mike Huckabee and Ted Cruz are similar in that they heavily appeal to religious conservatives, who
are upset over the same sex marriage ruling. They also polled strong enough to comfortably make the
first two varsity debates. Mike Huckabee is a longtime governor, but he may struggle to expand his
appeal beyond the religious conservatives. (To explain that last sentence a bit better, I think that
being a state governor is better preparation for the presidency than being a U.S. Senator.)

At the risk of sounding repetitive, Ted Cruz might be similar to Scott Walker in that he can bridge
the gap between those who want outsiders, and those who favor the establishment, though he's clearly
closer towards the "outsiders" as he's heavily conservative and has infamously picked fights with
people in his own party. At the very least, compared to Trump and Carson, Cruz actually looks
reasonable, and I'm sure he will try to do whatever he can to get the lion's share of supporters of
Trump and Carson when those two inevitably drop out of the race. Cruz also has lots of money from
his Super PAC.

Finally, we have the *top* tier of candidates:

* Jeb Bush
* John Kasich
* Marco Rubio

Jeb Bush and John Kasich are (or were) governors and are respected by the Republican establishment.
The latter fact is something probably necessary to ultimately win the Republican nominee. Rubio is
only a first term Florida senator, but he's moderate enough to appeal to a wide range of Republican
voters and lacks any obvious downsides.

Why do I think Rubio will win among those three? Again, at the risk of sounding repetitive, it's
simple: Bush and Kasich are too moderate to appeal to the Trump-Carson supporters (and what the
heck, I'll throw in the Cruz and Fiorina supporters as well). Remember when Trump tried to make fun
of Graham and Rubio? I recall that his cell phone jab at Graham was a hit, but his insults to Rubio
(e.g., his hair is bad, he supports immigration, he misses too many votes) do not have the same
effect. The Republican party leaders may not want to risk having another establishment candidate and
alienate a large segment of its supporters, who might otherwise abstain from voting.

Now for the **huge** question: why do I think Rubio will beat Clinton in the general election? I
could go on and on about this, but (a) I don't know enough about politics, and (b) I don't think the
reasons are all that complicated. Many of the things we debate about (businesses, taxes, foreign
policy, etc.) are enormously complicated concepts that require years of experience and education to
make informed decisions. Yet I would argue that the majority of people rely on quick sound bites and
750-word opinion articles in their newspaper of choice to form opinions on these. So people aren't
going to dissect candidates to an alarming degree; by and large, the reasons why people will vote
for a certain person are simple.

With that in mind, here are four reasons why I think Rubio will prevail over Clinton:

- Reason 1: it's hard for a single political party to control the White House for a long time.
  Before Obama, we had eight years of a Republican president, then before that, eight years of a
  Democratic president.
- Reason 2: the crises going on in other parts of the world. I think the current Middle East mess
  (think Syria, and to a lesser extent, Iraq) will ultimately have a negative impact on Obama's
  legacy, and people may want a change in leadership styles.
- Reason 3: money and background. Rubio was born in a more disadvantaged environment, and I think his
  campaign will repeatedly try to play the contrast between his life and Clinton's. They'll probably
  focus more on how Clinton earns hundreds of thousands of dollars for delivering speeches, while
  Rubio's parents lived paycheck to paycheck.
- Reason 4: demographics. I really hate to label people by their race or gender[^jindal], but the
  fact that Rubio is Hispanic is going to neutralize some of the advantages Clinton would have due
  to being a woman.

For these reasons, if I were betting money on this, I think Rubio will be the next president. We
will see how things turn out.

***

[^dem]: It would be interesting to see the comparable venn diagram for the Democratic race, though
    since there are only three candidates (Clinton, O'Malley, and Sanders) it might be wisest to
    include other prominent Democrats not currently running for president.

[^jindal]: I do sympathize with Jindal when he says [he wants to avoid the use of "hyphenated
    Americans."](http://www.ibtimes.com/bobby-jindal-campaign-some-indian-americans-offended-republican-candidates-views-2002166)

