---
layout: post
title:  "For Final Projects, Class Presentations are Better than Poster Sessions"
date:   2015-12-25 23:59:00
permalink: 2015-12-25-for-final-projects-class-presentations-are-better-than-poster-sessions/
---

In computer science graduate-level courses at Berkeley, it is typical to have final projects instead
of final exams. There are two ways in which these projects are disseminated among the students:

- **Class Presentations**. These are when students prepare a five to ten minute talk to the class,
  using slides and other demos to state the project's main accomplishments. Due to explosions in
  class enrollment (see my class reviews here for examples), time limits are strictly enforced, so
  presentations must be precisely timed and polished.

- **Poster Sessions**. These are when students bring a poster describing their work. Usually,
  students create posters by stuffing lots of images and text in a power point slide (or other
  software). Then they print using their lab's poster printer.

I've experienced both scenarios at Berkeley, and based on those I would strongly state the following
to instructors: *class presentations are better than poster sessions, and should be the method of
choice for dissemination of final projects*.

First, a class presentation means students practice a useful skill, one that they will likely need
for their future careers. This is especially true for *academic careers*, and students taking
graduate-level courses are far more likely to want academic careers than the average undergrad.  For
me, presentations are also a way that I can channel my humor, which isn't immediately apparent to
other students. A second, less important reason, is that in an age of exploding enrollment in
graduate courses, it's nice to be able to finally learn people's names when they give class
presentations.

One can, of course, learn names and project accomplishments in poster sessions, but this requires
more effort and is challenging for people like me. I have *lots* of difficulty navigating my way
through loud, noisy poster sessions filled with accents. I either resort to reading people's posters
(and not understanding much of it anyway due to time constraints) or going through the awkwardness
of having a sign language interpreter with me (and having that interpreter struggling through
accents and technical terms).

Poster sessions have other downsides that apply broadly, and not just to deaf students. For
instance, poster sessions allow students to hide. What happens if students don't manage to do much
for their final projects? As I've seen happen in my classes, these students go to the corner of the
room to avoid the spotlight. Presentations avoid this issue, unless students are willing to go as
far as to even *skip their presentation time*. Some students who are nervous about public speaking
might also want to hide. To most of them, I would respond: good luck convincing your future bosses
to have you not do any presenting.

If class presentations force students to produce something that is worth presenting and force them
to encounter their fears, then that's probably sufficient reason alone to use them!

There are other downsides to having poster sessions. They cost more, creating a chasm between
students who have access to fancy poster printers and those who don't; the latter may have to resort
to printing out ten pages of work and pasting them together in a poster. Furthermore, the posters
that get printed are unlike to be used again, in the exact form. True, many conferences have poster
sessions due to scalability issues, but class projects are not generally up to par with research
projects, so students would have to re-print posters anyway. And that's assuming that students are
using class projects as the basis for future research, which isn't always the case.

Class presentations are also superior to poster sessions in that they require less physical room.
The presentations can be delivered in the same lecture room, while poster sessions force the course
staff to go through the trouble of finding and reserving a large room (or hallway, as is the case
for Berkeley).

Furthermore, the one "benefit" of poster sessions, scalability, does not stand up to a rigorous
analysis. (If there are other benefits, please let me know because I can't think of any.)

First, if the class size is so large that it approaches the enrollment of a popular academic
conference, then *would the course staff really have time to read the final reports*? Remember,
neither presentations nor poster sessions enable people to fully understand a project; for this, one
has to read papers.

Second, with five minutes per presentation, the process goes by quickly, and it is also easier for
the course staff to track progress. Also, with a large class, it is likely that students would be
encouraged to form groups, drastically reducing the quantity of presentations. If there's too many
presentations for one class, the course staff should divide the class into groups.

Finally, scheduling presentations is not generally a problem even with many groups. Here's a simple
procedure: have a random draw to see who goes next. If the class requires a fixed schedule, then
busy instructors should have their TAs form the order of presentations.

Unfortunately, the [classes I'm taking next semester][1] have historically used poster sessions
rather than verbal presentations, but perhaps I could convince them to change their minds?

[1]:http://danieltakeshi.github.io/2015-10-31-the-benefits-of-having-the-same-group-of-interpreters/
