---
layout: post
title: "Give Video Relay Services a Try"
date:   2015-06-06 21:30:00
permalink: 2015-06-06-give-video-relay-services-a-try/
---

[Video Relay Services](https://www.fcc.gov/guides/video-relay-services) is a federally-subsidized
service that allows deaf and hard of hearing users to have conversations over the phone with the
assistance of a sign language interpreter. If the deaf person uses video relay to call another
person, then he or she will be calling using a computer or a television, and there will be a sign
language interpreter shown on the screen who follows the conversation. The sign language interpreter
signs what the hearing person says, and the deaf person can see the translation and then respond by
communicating in English or sign language. In the former case, no additional action is needed from
the interpreter, as the callee should hear the deaf person. In the latter case, the interpreter
watches what the deaf person says, and then verbally relays the information to the other party. To
the callee, it is like having a normal phone call.

This sounds like a tremendously beneficial service for deaf people, and I admit it: I should have
been using Video Relay Services a long time ago. I signed up to use Video Relay in February, and
have used it four times so far. Since it's June now, that might not sound like a lot, but for
someone who used to make about one phone call a year to a non-family member, it's significant.

The reason why I took so long to embrace Video Relay had to do with initial perceptions.  I learned
about Video Relay in 2008 when a staff member from [Sorenson VRS](http://www.sorensonvrs.com/) gave
a presentation about it to the deaf and hard of hearing students in my high school. I soon had it
installed at home, but probably made only three calls. At that time, I had to use a specialized
television screen with a specialized camera and a complicated remote, and the video quality left
much to be desired.

Nowadays, it's much easier because there are applications that allow me to use Video Relay from my
laptop. I use Video Relay like I use Skype: I open the software on my computer, sign in, make sure
my camera is working, and dial the desired number. The software will not call the number
immediately, because it first has to connect to an available sign language interpreter, who will
then make the actual call to the callee.  It should not take more than five minutes to connect to an
interpreter.

As I explained earlier, one can use video relay by signing or speaking to the interpreter. I use the
latter case, which is technically called *Voice Carry Over*. This is my preferred communication
mechanism, because my English is better than my ASL, and signs can turn choppy and distorted across
a monitor.

To get started with using Video Relay, I signed up with [Z5
Desktop](http://www.zvrs.com/products/softwareapps/z5-desktop---new) and downloaded their free
application for my Macbook Pro laptop. I had to first verify my address and related information with
a staff member via video relay. We talked for a little while (in sign language) and then he
officially gave me the go-ahead to start using the service. The whole setup was much easier than I
expected. Surprisingly, he never asked me for documentation regarding my hearing loss, and as far as
I know, only deaf and hard of hearing people are allowed to use Video Relay.

I suppose the lack of accessible software was a valid reason for avoiding Video Relay Services, but
again, I should have used it once I went to college and had my own laptop. I can remember *many*
cases when a simple phone call might have made things so much clearer for me. Yet, I would often
settle for wading though a mountain of documentation and sending emails with long turnaround times.
As far as technical difficulties are concerned, I have not had any problems so far. My one concern
with accommodating the communication needs for deaf people is that there are some who do not know
sign language. They would still struggle in cases when people only give out [a phone number for
contact
information](http://danieltakeshi.github.io/2015/01/31/deaf-friendly-tactic-provide-an-email-address/).
But for someone with my background, Video Relay Services takes care of a lot of my needs, and I am
thankful for that.
