---
layout: post
title:  "Markov Decision Processes and Reinforcement Learning"
date:   2015-08-02 13:00:00
permalink: 2015-08-02-markov-decision-processes-and-reinforcement-learning/
---

In this post, we'll review Markov Decision Processes and Reinforcement Learning. This material is
from Chapters 17 and 21 in Russell and Norvig (2010).

## Markov Decision Processes

The general idea with this situation is that we are an agent in some world, and we have a set of
states, actions (for each state), a transition probability (which we may not actually know), and a
reward function. The goal for a rational agent is to maximize the expected sum of (discounted)
rewards for a state $$\mathbb{E}[\sum_t \gamma^t R(s_t)]$$, where $$0 \le \gamma \le 1$$ is our
discount factor, which we usually assume is equal to one for toy cases only.

This is the setup of a Markov Decision Process (MDP), with the added constraint that the probability
of going to another state only depends on the current state, which is why we call this a *Markov*
Decision Process. Since the ultimate goal is to maximize the expected utility, we will need to learn
a *policy* function $$\pi$$ that maps states to actions. Finally, while not strictly necessary, it
is common to "spice up" the MDP problem by assuming that actions are *non-deterministic*. In the
canonical grid-world example described in the book (and in a lot of undergraduate AI classes, for
that matter), we assume if we move *North*, then that has an 80 percent chance of succeeding. Hence,
the transition probability $$P(s' \mid s, a) = P(s,a,s')$$ is nontrivial, where $$s$$ and $$s'$$ are
states, and $$a$$ is the action we took at state $$s$$.

In order to understand how to get an optimal policy, we first need to realize how exactly to define
the *value* $$V^*(s)$$ of a state, which in other words, *is the expected utility we will get if we
are at state $$s$$ and play optimally*. (The asterisk here is to indicate optimality.) There are,
sadly, *two* common formulations for $$V^*(s)$$. The first, from R & N, assumes that the *reward*
aspect of the formula is defined in terms of a state only:

$$V^*(s) = R(s) + \gamma \max_a \sum_{s'} P(s,a,s') V^*(s')$$

The second formulation, which Berkeley's CS 188 class uses[^confused], defines reward in terms of a
state-action-successor triple:

$$V^*(s) = \max_a \sum_{s'} P(s,a,s') [R(s,a,s') + \gamma V^*(s')]$$

Both of these equation sets can be called the **Bellman Equations**, which characterize the optimal
values (but we will generally need some other way of computing them, as we show shortly). In
general, I will utilize the second formulation, but the formulations are not fundamentally
different.

It is also common to define a new quantity called a *Q-value* with respect to state-action pairs:

$$Q^*(s,a) = \sum_{s'} P(s,a,s')[R(s,a,s') + \gamma V^*(s')]$$

In words, $$Q(s,a)$$ is the expected utility starting at state $$s$$, *taking action $$a$$*, and
hereafter, playing optimally. We can therefore relate the $$V$$s and $$Q$$s with the following
equation:

$$V^*(s) = \max_a Q^*(s,a)$$

I find it easiest to think of these in terms of expectimax trees with chance nodes. The "normal"
nodes correspond to $$V$$s, and the "chance" nodes correspond to $$Q$$s. Both nodes have multiple
successors: the $$V$$s because we have *choices of actions*, and $$Q$$s because, even if we commit
to an action, the actual *outcome* is generally non-deterministic, so we will not know what state we
end up in. (I guess we can also view states as the "normal" nodes here.)

Given these definitions, how do we figure out the optimal policy? There are two common tactics:

- **Value Iteration** is an iterative algorithm that computes values of states indexed by a $$k$$,
  as in $$V_k(s)$$, which can also be thought of the best value of state $$s$$ assuming the game
  ends in $$k$$ time-steps. This is not the actual policy itself, but these values *are used* to
  determine the optimal policy[^russell].
  
  Starting with $$V_0(s) = 0$$ for all $$s$$, value iteration performs the following update:

  $$V_{k+1}(s) \leftarrow \max_a \sum_{s'} P(s,a,s') [R(s,a,s') + \gamma V_{k}(s')]$$

  and it repeats until we tell it to stop.

  To make this intuitive, during each step, we have a vector of $$V_k(s)$$ values, and then we do a
  *one-ply expectimax computation* to get the next vector. Note that expectimax *could* compute all
  of the values we need, but it would take too long due to repeated and infinite depth state trees.

  To prove value iteration converges to $$V^*$$ (and uniquely!), appeal to *contraction* and the
  fact that $$\gamma^k$$, so long as $$\gamma \ne 1$$, will go down to zero.  Said another way, the
  "$$V_k$$ tree" and the "$$V_{k+1}$$ tree" are different only in their last layer, but that last
  layer's contribution is reduced exponentially.

- **Policy Iteration** is generally an improvement over Value Iteration because policies often 
  converge long before the values do, so we alternate between *policy evaluation* and *policy
  improvement* steps. In the first step, we assume we are given a policy $$\pi$$ and have to figure
  out the expected utilities of each state when executing $$\pi$$. These values are characterized
  by the following equations:

  $$V^\pi(s) = \sum_{s'} P(s,\pi(s),s') [R(s,\pi(s),s') + \gamma V^\pi(s')]$$

  Note that the MAX operator is gone because $$\pi(s)$$ gives us our action. Thus, we can solve
  these equations in $$O(n^3)$$ time with standard matrix multiplication methods[^alternatively].

  It is actually rather easy to do policy improvement *from Q-values*:

  $$\pi^*(s) = \arg_a \max Q^*(s,a)$$

  Alternatively, we can use the more complicated expectimax form:

  $$\pi^*(s) = \arg_a \max \sum_{s'} P(s,a,s')[R(s,a,s') + \gamma V^*(s')]$$

  The two steps would iterate until convergence, and like value iteration, policy iteration is
  optimal. Also, these equations are really policy *extraction*, in the sense that given values, we
  know how to get a policy.

In general, policy iteration seems to be a slightly better bet than value iteration, though I guess
the latter could be simpler to implement in some cases since it only involves the value updating
part?

If we do not know exactly what state we are in, we do not have a notion of $$s$$ here, so we need to
change our representation of the problem. This is the **Partially Observable Markov Decision
Process** (POMDP) case. We augment the MDP with a *sensor model* $$P(e \mid s)$$ and treat states
as *belief* states. In a discrete MDP with $$n$$ states, the belief state vector $$b$$ would be an
$$n$$-dimensional vector with components representing the probabilities of being in a particular
state. The belief state update for a particular component (state) $$s'$$ looks a lot like an HMM
update:

$$b(s') \propto P(e \mid s') \sum_{s'} P(s' \mid s, a) b(s)$$

The cycle is: we compute an action from $$b$$, see evidence $$e$$, compute a new belief state (using
the above formula), then repeat.  Fortunately, the optimal action for a POMDP only depends on the
current belief state, allowing us to have our policy $$\pi$$ be a mapping from a belief state to an
action.

We can also map POMDPs to an observable MDP formula, by appropriately defining transition $$P(b'
\mid b, a)$$ and reward $$\rho(b)$$ functions. For instance, $$\rho(b) = \sum_{s}b(s)R(s)$$. The
optimal policy for this new MDP over the *belief* states is the *same* optimal policy over the
original POMDP. This is good, since we've reduced this problem to an MDP, but we have to modify our
earlier algorithms to handle continuous-valued state spaces. A key observation that will help: the
value function $$V(b)$$ over belief states is piecewise linear and convex, because it is the maximum
of a collection of hyperplanes. What a modified value iteration algorithm needs to do is to
accumulate a set of possible plans, and for a given belief state, compute which of those has the
optimal hyperplane. But this is too slow so in practice, people use online algorithms based on
one-step lookahead, inspired by Dynamic Bayesian Networks.

To understand POMDPs well, consider simple MDPs with two states, so we can represent $$b$$ as a
scalar.




## Reinforcement Learning

Now we switch to the *reinforcement learning* case. Before diving into the details, it is easiest to
think of us in the same MDP framework, *except that* we have to learn our policy *online*, not
offline. This is harder because we typically assume we do not know the transition probabilities
ahead of time, or even the rewards. Unfortunately, this means we will try out different paths, and
will sometimes fail (e.g., falling into the -1 pit in the gridworld example).

First, consider the **passive reinforcement** case, where we are given a fixed (possibly garbage)
policy $$\pi$$ and the only goal is to learn the values at each state, according to the Bellman
equations.

Here's one way to get the values: learn the transitions $$P$$ and the rewards $$R$$ through trials,
then immediately apply the policy evaluation step in policy iteration. As a reminder, this computes
values (as in value iteration) but since the policy is fixed, we can solve the set of equations
quickly.  This technique, which Russell and Norvig seem to call **adaptive dynamic programming**, is
part of the class of *model-based* learning techniques, because that assumes we have to compute a
*model* of the world (i.e., the transitions and rewards). Here, our agent could play a series of
actions from a variety of states ("restarting" when necessary). At the end, it will have data about
the rewards it's gotten, along with the number of times it transitioned from state $$i$$ to state
$$j$$. To compute the transition function, we would convert the counts to the averages in a "Maximum
Likelihood Estimate"-manner. The rewards are easier because we can see $$R(s,a,s')$$ immediately
when we transition from $$s$$ to $$s'$$.

In *model-free* learning, we do not bother to compute the transition model, but instead only compute
the actual *values* of each state. There is a basic technique called **direct utility estimation**
that falls in this category of methods. The idea here is that for each trial, we need to record the
sum of discounted rewards for each state visited. After a series of trials, these values will
average out and converge, albeit slowly since direct utility estimation does not take into account
the Bellman Equations.

We need a better solution. Since we already have a policy, we would like to do some form of policy
evaluation (explained earlier), but we do not have the transitions and rewards. We can approximate
those with our samples instead, which leads to **Temporal Difference learning**. This is a
model-free tactic where, after each transition $$(s,a,s',r)$$, we update the values:

$$V^\pi(s) \leftarrow (1-\alpha)V^\pi(s) + \alpha\underbrace{[R(s,\pi(s),s') + \gamma V^\pi(s)]}_{\rm sample}$$

In short, TD learning works by adjusting the utility estimates towards the ideal equilibrium as
stated by the Bellman equations. But what if we want to get a new *policy*?  TD learning does not
learn the transition probabilities, so we switch to learning *Q-values*, since it is easier to
extract actions from Q-values.

This now brings us to **active reinforcement** learning, where we have to *learn* an optimal policy
by *choosing* actions. Clearly, there will be some tradeoffs between exploration and exploitation.

The solution here is an algorithm called **Q-Learning**, which iteratively computes Q-values:

$$Q(s,a) \leftarrow (1-\alpha) Q(s,a) + \alpha \underbrace{[R(s,a,s') + \gamma \max_{a'}Q(s',a')]}_{\rm sample}$$

Notice how the sample here is slightly different than in TD learning. Each sample is computed from a
$$(s,a,s',r)$$ tuple.

The amazing thing is, so long as certain obvious assumptions hold, such as that we visit states
sufficiently often, Q-Learning will converge to an optimal solution *even if* the actions we take
are repeatedly suboptimal[^visitoften]! In the fire pit example in the CS 188 class, we could keep
jumping in the pit, but so long as our actions are somewhat stochastic, we will eventually have some
paths that end up in the lone beneficial spot, which will result in higher Q-values for those states
and actions that lead towards that spot. (Think of each grid as having four Q-values.)

Even so, it would probably be wise to have good heuristics for deciding on what actions to take,
which might make Q-Learning converge faster. The simplest (and worst) strategy: act according to a
current policy, but with some small probability, we choose a random action. To improve this, use
*exploration functions* that weigh the importance of actions and states based on whether their
values are "established" or not. This information propagates back so that we end up favoring actions
that *lead* to unexplored areas. This means for some exploration function $$f$$, the action we pick
at a step will be $$\arg_{a'} \max f(Q(s',a'), N(s',a'))$$ where $$N$$ represents counts, and the
new Q-Learning update is:

$$Q(s,a) \leftarrow (1-\alpha) Q(s,a) + \alpha \underbrace{[R(s,a,s') + \gamma \max_{a'} f(Q(s',a'), N(s',a')]}_{\rm sample}$$

There is a close relative to Q-Learning called **SARSA**, State-Action-Reward-State-Action. The
update is, following Russell and Norvig's notation to have rewards be fixed to a state:

$$Q(s,a) \leftarrow (1-\alpha)Q(s,a) + \alpha(R(s) + \gamma Q(s',a'))$$

What this means is that we already have an action $$a'$$ chosen for the successor state $$s'$$.
Q-Learning will choose the best action $$a'$$, but in SARSA, it is fixed, and *then* we can update
$$Q(s,a)$$. SARSA and Q-Learning (the first version here, not the second version with $$f$$) are the
same for a greedy agent always picking the best action.  When exploration happens, Q-Learning will
attempt to pick the best action, but SARSA picks whatever is actually going to happen. This means
Q-Learning does not pay attention to the policy, i.e., it is **off-policy**, but SARSA does, so it
is **on-policy**. Here's an example I thought of to clarify: the fire pit in CS 188 means that a
policy that tells us to go in the pit will be bad, but if transitions are stochastic, then at *some
point*, we will get to the good exit, hence Q-Learning will eventually learn that best value. But
with SARSA, we do not get that opportunity because we will always have the next action fixed, so it
is "more realistic" in some sense.

It is worth pointing out that all this previous discussion about learning all the $$Q(s,a)$$ values
is really applicable only for the smallest of problems, because we cannot tabulate all those in
real-life situations. Thus, we resort to **Approximate Q-Learning**. Here, we use feature-based
representations by representing a state as a vector of features:

$$V(s) = w_1f_1(s) + \cdots + w_nf_n(s)$$

And the same for the Q-values:

$$Q(s,a) = w_1f_1(s,a) + \cdots + w_nf_n(s,a)$$

We usually make things linear in terms of the features for simplicity. This has the additional
benefit in that we can *generalize* to states we have not visited yet (in addition to the obvious
compression benefits). Note that when we do the Q-Learning update here, we change the *weights*.
Each weight update looks like the same kind of update we see in stochastic gradient descent.

Finally, the last major reinforcement learning topic is **policy search**.  It actually seems like
the policy iteration analogue: we only care about the policy, not the actual values themselves.
Starting with an initial feature-based representation of the Q-states, we might consider tweaking
the individual weights up and down and then evaluating the result of that representation to see if
our rewards are higher. This may involve computing an expression for the expected reward, or running
an agent in the world multiple times.



## Old CS 188 Exam Questions

I found four interesting questions related to MDPs and reinforcement learning.

- [Spring 2011, Question 4 ("Worst-Case Markov Decision
  Processes")](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cs188websitecontent/exams/sp11_final.pdf). Now we
  measure the quality of a policy by its *worst-case utility*, or in other words, *what we are
  guaranteed to achieve*. This question is really intellectually simulating, as we have to consider
  the algorithm from a *minimax* perspective, rather than an *expectimax* perspective.
  
  For a state, we have:

  $$L^*(s) = \max_a \min_{s' \in C(s,a)} [R(s,a,s') + \gamma L^*(s')]$$

  So we pick the action that maximizes the following quantity: it is the discounted reward based on
  the *worst* possible state $$s'$$ to which we *could* transition.

  There is a corresponding Q-value version:

  $$M^*(s,a) = R(s) + \gamma \min_{s' \in C(s,a)} \max_{a'} M^*(s',a')$$

  We are guaranteed $$R(s)$$, but have *already committed* to action $$a$$, so the adversary is free
  to send us to the *worst* possible subsequent state for us (as long as that transition has
  non-zero probability, of course), but then we are free to maximize over the next action.

  If we want to do $$M$$-Learning, then it is actually easier than standard $$Q$$-Learning because
  the environment has deterministic rewards and we only care about the minimax one, so if we ever
  observe a reward, we know that it's the correct one.

- [Fall 2011, Question 4 (An un-named
  question)](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cs188websitecontent/exams/fa11_final.pdf). This one
  required us to actually perform some computations of value iteration and Q-learning. The only
  non-trivial thing about this was the jump from C, which could land in either D or E. I personally
  found it easiest to just run Value Iteration and try to reason about the Q-values later. The
  Q-learning *iterative* update is:

  $$Q_{k+1}(s,a) \leftarrow \sum_{s'} P(s,a,s') [R(s,a,s') + \gamma \max_{a'}Q_k(s',a')]$$

  For the third part, the tricky thing was to remember that the Q-learning update will involve
  MAX-ing over previously computed Q-values.

- [Fall 2012, Question 6 ("Reinforcement
  Learning")](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cs188websitecontent/exams/fa12_final.pdf). This
  question makes clear the distinction between Q-Learning and SARSA. For part (a), they give us the
  formula for the Q-Learning agent, and ask if this will converge to the optimal set of Q-values
  even if the policy we're following is suboptimal. The answer is yes, since they also mention in
  the question several necessary requirements (e.g., that we visit all state-action pairs infinitely
  often). For part (b), the SARSA update, answer is *no*, we do not converge to the optimal
  Q-values, because SARSA will have Q-values for whatever policy is actually being executed. This
  policy that we converge to is the policy that follows $$\pi$$ with probability 0.5, and uniformly
  random otherwise.

- [Fall 2012, Question 7
  ("Bandits")](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/cs188websitecontent/exams/fa12_final.pdf). This is
  a rather long question. Part (a) gives a nice review of MEU and VPI, and the remaining parts now
  deal with POMDPs over the two states of having bandits versus not having bandits. Hence, we
  represent the belief state as a single scalar $$b$$ representing the probability we believe there
  *are* bandits. When we have to compute $$b_{t+1} = P(s_{t+1} = +b)$$ in the tree, we use the
  following formula:

  $$P(s_{t+1} = +b) = \frac{P(e = +safe \mid s_{t+1} = +b)b_t}{P(e = +safe \mid s_{t+1} = +b)b_t + P(e = +safe \mid s_{t+1} = -b)(1-b_t)}$$

  Notice that this is precisely the formula for updating the belief state that we discussed earlier
  in the notes, except that we have the transition function as the identity. By the way, it took me
  a while to figure this out, but the normalizing constant here needs to iterate through the set of
  belief states. We have a scalar $$b_t$$, but we really have to consider the case of there possibly
  being *no* bandits at all. A bit tricky here. The transition probability is also tricky, so it's
  easiest to think of it in terms of the problem: what is the probability of even reaching this
  node?

  Finally, they discuss some utility diagrams. As we discussed earlier, to find the overall value
  function, we take the maximum over all the possible lines. For the discounting questions, part (i)
  the point was that agents with larger $$\gamma$$ values should be more concerned about the future,
  so they are more willing to try out short-term suboptimal paths. Thus, Agent A has a higher
  discount factor because it played the sub-optimal *Land* action one more time. In part (ii), there
  are three plots you can easily remove. Then it's just assigning three plots to three discount
  factors. A higher discount factor means we need to be more certain that we have bandits before we
  commit to making air shipments.

***

[^confused]: Here is where I get confused. Why are we having Berkeley's AI class use a different
    formulation than what R & N are using? I mean, Stuart Russell *is a faculty member here*, so why
    are we choosing the other way? For pedagogical purposes?

[^alternatively]: Alternatively, if that step is still too expensive, one can perform iterative
    updates as we would in value iteration for some number of steps, then switch to policy
    improvement. In this case, we would add $$k$$s as subscripts.

[^russell]: In R & N's notation, we would use $$\pi(s) = \arg_a \max \sum_s P(s,a,s') V^*(s)$$.

[^visitoften]: But we do need to visit states often enough. In section 21.3 of R & N, they make it
    clear that at each time step (i.e., after each sample of state-action-rewards-successors), we
    *could* compute a model with whatever information we have, and then follow the optimal policy
    for that. But such a greedy agent is not good because it will never try out different states
        whose value may not be established.



