---
title: The Missing Deaf American Politician
author: Daniel Seita
layout: post
permalink: /2015/04/11/the-missing-deaf-american-politician/
geo_public:
  - 0
categories:
  - Deaf
tags:
  - deaf politician
  - Hillary Clinton
  - politician
  - Scott Walker
  - U.S. President
---

<img src="{{site.url}}/assets/dem-2016-clinton-banner.jpg" alt="clinton">

It&#8217;s time to gear up for the 2016 United States Presidential election race! [Ted Cruz][2],
[Rand Paul][3], [Hillary Clinton][4], and [Marco Rubio][5] &#8212; in that order &#8212; have all
announced or will announce that they will be running for president.

Now marks the beginning of the inevitable wait until Rand Paul becomes the next president. But in
the meantime, I wonder about whether the United States has ever had a prominent deaf politician.
Anyone in the Senate? How about the House of Representatives? Or even a member in a state
legislature, or a mayor for a large city? Due to their average age, I&#8217;m sure we have had some
slightly hearing-impaired politicians, but those don&#8217;t count to me. I&#8217;m talking about
someone who was born deaf or became deaf at a young age, and who knows sign language, *and* who has
strong connections to the Deaf community? Here, I&#8217;m using the capital &#8220;D&#8221; to
indicate association with the community.

Unfortunately, to the best of my knowledge, America has never had one. On Wikipedia, there&#8217;s
currently two relevant pages: &#8220;[Deaf politicians][6]&#8221; and &#8220;[List of Deaf
People][7]&#8220;. (I know there are politicians who don&#8217;t have Wikipedia pages, but the
simple existence of such a page indicates that there is *some* prestige to the position to which the
politician is elected.)

The &#8220;Deaf politicians&#8221; page currently lists 14 relevant names. What&#8217;s interesting
to me is that *none* of these people are or were *American* politicians. There are four British, two
Hungarian, one French, one Austrian, one Greek, one Belgian, one Icelander, one Canadian, one South
African, and one New Zelander.

It&#8217;s also intriguing that the list of deaf politicians is dominated by Europeans. It seems
like a future topic of investigation would be to see if there exist additional biases against deaf
people in non-European countries as compared to European countries. I&#8217;m particularly curious
about the treatment of deaf people in Asian countries.

That second page, &#8220;List of Deaf People&#8221; does not provide any new deaf politicians
outside of what the first page did.

Thus, it looks like America has lacked prominent deaf politicians in its entire existence. From my
investigation, the closest thing we have had as a deaf politician is that Canadian guy, [Gary
Malkowski][8], because he spoke in *American* Sign Language while on the job. ([Here is a biography
of him][9], and [another one on lifeprint.com][10], which is also an excellent resource for getting
up-to-speed on ASL.) Mr. Malkowski was probably the first truly elected deaf politician in the
world, serving on the Legislative Assembly of Ontario from 1990 to 1995 and becoming one of the
world&#8217;s foremost advocates of rights for people with disabilities. Not being Canadian, I
don&#8217;t have a good idea of how prestigious his position was, but I imagine it&#8217;s
comparable to being a member of an American state legislature? His background includes a
Bachelor&#8217;s degree in Social Work and Psychology from Gallaudet University.

While it is disappointing that the Deaf American Politician has never come into play, I am sure that
within the next thirty years, we will be seeing at least one such person, given how numerous
barriers have eroded over the years to allow a more educated deaf population, though I&#8217;m
guessing there will be some debate over the &#8220;level of deafness&#8221; of such a candidate who
shows up. I would bet that if this future politician has a background in American Sign Language and
has even a weak connection to the Deaf Community, he or she will be able to win the vote of most of
the severely hearing-impaired population (which includes the Deaf Community). The main question, of
course, would be if the general population can provide the necessary votes.

To be clear, a deaf person should not automatically vote for a deaf politician, akin to how a black
person should not automatically vote for Barack Obama or a woman should not automatically vote for
Hillary Clinton. But such demographic information *is* a factor, and people can relate to those who
share similar experiences. For instance, [being deaf is key for positions such as the presidency of
Gallaudet University][11].

To wrap up this post, here&#8217;s my **real** prediction for the two ultimate candidates for the
2016 U.S. Presidential Election: Hillary Clinton and Scott Walker. Jeb Bush is not winning his
party&#8217;s nomination since voters will (possibly unfairly) associate him with his brother.

I&#8217;ll come back to this post in a little over a year to see if I predicted correctly. By then,
hopefully there will be a deaf person who is making a serious run for a political position, but I
doubt it.

 [2]: http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/ted-cruz-is-late-to-the-party/
 [3]: http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/rand-paul-is-losing-his-fathers-base/
 [4]: http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/the-hillary-clinton-steamroller-rumbles-to-life/
 [5]: http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/marco-rubio-and-the-pareto-frontier/
 [6]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Deaf_politicians
 [7]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_deaf_people
 [8]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gary_Malkowski
 [9]: http://www.lco-cdo.org/en/gary-malkowski
 [10]: http://www.lifeprint.com/asl101/topics/malkowski-gary.htm
 [11]: https://danieltakeshi.github.io/2015/01/11/gallaudet-university-is-searching-for-a-president/
