---
title: 'New Year&#8217;s Resolutions: 2015 Edition'
author: Daniel Seita
layout: post
permalink: /2015/01/08/new-years-resolutions-2015-edition/
geo_public:
  - 0
categories:
  - Everything Else
tags:
  - academic papers
  - barbell training
  - books
  - motivation
  - "New Year's resolution"
  - reading
  - weight lifting
---
It&#8217;s that time of the year when many people are creating New Year&#8217;s resolutions.

Wait, scratch that. We&#8217;re a week into 2015, so I think it&#8217;s more accurate for me to say:
it&#8217;s that time of the year when many people have forgotten or given up on their New
Year&#8217;s resolutions. After all, this guy from Forbes claims that [only eight percent of people
achieve their resolutions][1].

Why am I discussing this subject? Last semester, I was in a continuous &#8220;graduate
student&#8221; state where I would read, read, take a few notes, attend classes, do homework, read
more research papers, do odd hobbies on weekends, and repeat the cycle. I rarely got the chance to
step back and look at the big picture, so perhaps some New Year&#8217;s resolutions would be good
for me. And before you claim that few people stick with them, I *also* had New Year&#8217;s
    resolutions for 2014, *and* I kept my text document about it on my desktop. Thus, I was able to
    keep them in mind throughout the full year, even if I ended up falling short on many goals (I
    set the bar quite high).

For a variety of reasons, I had a disappointing first semester, so most of my resolutions are about
making myself a *better researcher*. I think one obstacle for me is the pace in which I read
research papers. I&#8217;ve always thought of myself as someone who relies less on lectures and more
on outside reading in classes than most (Berkeley computer science graduate) students, so I was
hoping that my comparative advantage would be in reading research papers. Unfortunately, to really
understand even an 8-page conference paper that I need for research, I may end up spending *days*
just to completely get the concepts and to fill in the technical details omitted from the paper due
to page limits.

When reading research papers, it&#8217;s not uncommon for me to lose my focus, which means I spend
considerable time backtracking. Perhaps this could be rectified with better reading habits?
I&#8217;m going to try and [follow the advice in this blog post][2] about reading real books, rather
than getting all my news from condensed newspaper or blog articles. (Ironically, I just broke my own
rule, but I *will* cut back on reading blogs and arbitrary websites &#8230; and also, I came up with
this idea about two weeks ago, so it&#8217;s nice to see that there&#8217;s someone who agrees with
me.) Last week, I read two high-octane thrillers &#8212; *Battle Royale* and *The Maze Runner
&#8212;* to get me back into &#8220;reading mode&#8221; and am moving on to reading non-fiction,
scholar-like books. Maybe books will help me quit Minecraft for good (so far, it&#8217;s working:
I&#8217;ve played zero seconds of Minecraft in 2015).

I&#8217;ve also recorded some concrete goals for weight lifting (specifically, barbell training),
which is one of my primary non-academic hobbies. For the past *four* years, my motivation to attend
the gym has been through the roof. I&#8217;ve never missed substantial gym time unless I was
traveling. In retrospect, I think programs like Stronglifts and Starting Strength (which I loosely
follow) are so popular *because they generate motivation.* Both use the same set of basic, compound
lifts, but as you proceed throughout the programs, you add more weight *if* it is safe to do so.
Obviously, the more weight you can lift, the stronger you are! I often juxtapose weight lifting and
addictive role-playing games (RPGs), where my personal statistics in real life barbell lifts
correspond to a hypothetical &#8220;strength&#8221; attribute in an RPG game that I continually want
to improve.

[Here's a video of me a few days ago][3] doing the bench press, which is one of the four major
lifts I do, the others being the squat, deadlift, and overhead press. I know there&#8217;s at least
one reader of this blog who also benches, and we&#8217;re neck-to-neck on it so maybe this will
provide some motivation (yeah, there&#8217;s that word again&#8230;).

This is one set of five reps for 180 pounds; I did five sets that day. (The bar is 45 pounds, the
two large plates on both sides are 45 pounds, and each side has two 10-pound plates and one
2.5-pound plate.) I remember when I was a senior in high school and couldn&#8217;t do a single rep
at 135 pounds, so seeing these new results shows how far I&#8217;ve come from my earlier days.
I&#8217;m definitely hoping the same feeling will transition to my research and motivation in
general.

[Motivation][4]. It&#8217;s an incredibly powerful concept, and a must for graduate students to
possess with respect to research.

 [1]: http://www.forbes.com/sites/dandiamond/2013/01/01/just-8-of-people-achieve-their-new-years-resolutions-heres-how-they-did-it/
 [2]: http://calnewport.com/blog/2015/01/05/deep-habits-read-a-real-book-slowly/
 [3]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WXWtDYPa-og
 [4]: http://pgbovine.net/mmm-student-advising.htm
