---
layout: post
title:  "Captioning and Other Accommodations During my Trip to Washington DC"
date:   2016-07-03 10:00:00
permalink: 2016-07-03-captioning-and-other-accommodations-during-my-trip-to-washington-dc/
---

I took a break from [paper reviewing][1] to be in Washington DC for a few days. This marked my first
time being in the city, and it's been a pleasure to tour arguably the most important one of our
country. My visit coincided with the July 4 weekend, so there was a lot of patriotism on display.
Among my itinerary in Washington DC was [Capitol Hill][2] and the [Smithsonian National Air and
Space Museum][3]. Both are government-controlled entities, which means that admission is free
(because we pay for it with our taxes[^foreign]) and that they are expected to provide reasonable
accommodations for people with disabilities.

Just to be clear, I don't want to suggest that the private sector doesn't do a good job providing
accommodations. I do, however, believe that government agencies *might* be *slightly, slightly* more
sensitive for the need to provide disability-related accommodations. After all, wouldn't it be an
embarrassment if they failed to follow the Americans with Disabilities Act?

Not having done much planning in advance (thank you, paper reviewing!) I didn't know what to expect
with regards to accommodations. Fortunately, my Capitol Hill visit turned out quite well. Despite
not having a reservation, I was able to participate in a guided tour of the building. This was split
in two parts. The first was a brief introductory video which described our nation's remarkable
history in 10-15 minutes. Fortunately, it had open captioning, so I was able to understand it.

The second part was the actual building tour. There were so many people that the guides split us up
into five groups, each with our own guide. What was interesting, though, was that we were all
provided headsets so that we could hear our tour guide speaking in his microphone (and only our tour
guide, not the others). This worked out well when we were in crowded areas with several tour guides
talking at once. For me, of course, I wouldn't have benefited much from the headsets. Fortunately,
after inquiring, I got a T-Coil necklace, and *wow*, that really amplified my guide's voice! It was
even louder than what I'm used to with FM systems, and on top of it all, there was no static. As a
result, I understood most of what my guide said throughout the tour. Speaking of the actual tour, it
was a nice experience looking inside Capitol Hill; we passed by Speaker Paul Ryan's office, though
we obviously didn't see the Speaker *himself*. We didn't get to explore much of the building,
unfortunately, and there is still substantial construction going on, obscuring much of the inner
Capitol Hill dome. Perhaps later I can try and get a better tour by submitting my name in the
lottery for the tours arranged by the California Representatives or Senators? Nonetheless, it was
still a good experience for me and I was happy with the tour and the accommodations.

I had a different experience at the Smithsonian Museum. After touring some of the ground floor
exhibits, I paid a ticket for one of their "featured films". I first asked for the standard
(non-IMAX) film that was closest to starting, but after I asked, the cashier told me it did not
have captions, and she recommended I instead watch *[A Beautiful Planet][4]*, offered in IMAX. Once
the doors opened to enter the theater, I lined up with everyone to take our 3D glasses. I found my
way into a good seat in the center of the auditorium, and ... there were no captions. IMAX films are
quite loud, but even so, I could not make out the conversations among the astronauts in the film. I
actually fell asleep about ten minutes into it out of boredom, and woke up at the end of the film. I
was a bit disappointed that an IMAX film causes me to nap rather than watch a movie (and no, I
didn't even turn off my hearing aids). I wonder: should I have asked for more details on the
captioning? I don't recall the exact words I uttered, but it's true that I could always have been
more specific with my wording. Or was I supposed to get *different* 3D glasses, kind of like how I
got a different kind of "headset" for the tour guide? I wouldn't be surprised if they had [closed
captioning glasses][5].  Or now that I think about it, did I simply mishear the person who I asked
about this? 

Lesson learned: I need to ask more questions, and to plan ahead for these once-in-a-few-years
visits.

***

[^foreign]: Ah, but doesn't that mean *foreigners* who visit are free-riding on us? Throughout my
    entire visit, no one ever asked me to prove my American citizenship.

[1]:http://danieltakeshi.github.io/2016-06-25-currently-reviewing-papers-for-nips-2016/
[2]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capitol_Hill
[3]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Air_and_Space_Museum
[4]:http://abeautifulplanet.imax.com/
[5]:http://danieltakeshi.github.io/2013/06/28/new-closed-captioning-glasses/
