---
layout: post
title:  "Thoughts on Isolation: Why I Hated the Fall 2013 and Fall 2015 Semesters"
date:   2016-01-04 23:59:00
permalink: 2016-01-04-thoughts-on-isolation-why-i-hated-the-fall-2013-and-fall-2015-semesters/
---

## Fall 2013

As an alumnus of Williams College, I regularly get emails from my class officers requesting for
donations to the college. These emails try to convince us to give money by including variations of:
"Don't forget the awesome memories you had at Williams. Please donate to support the experience of
current students!" On the Williams website, it's not hard to find testimonials of students saying
that they have made a lot of friends and love the college.  Many students have also told me this
directly.

I wish I could agree.

It has now been a year and a half since I graduated from Williams. During our commencement, since
the class size was small enough, the graduating students lined up to walk across the stage to get
their diplomas. For some students, as their name was called, the audience roared with the sounds of
their friends cheering and hollering, and Dean Sarah Bolton would have to smile and wait for the
applause to die down before calling the next student.

When she called me, a blanket fell over the crowd. It was uncomfortably quiet. As I approached
President Adam Falk to receive my diploma, I heard a faint scream out in the audience. I didn't look
there; I just took the diploma and went directly back to my seat, feeling a little sullen.

Later, my Mom asked me if I had heard her as I was walking on the stage.

To be fair, graduation wasn't a *complete* embarrassment, even though it sometimes felt that way.
Every now and then, I was able to find and talk to a few graduating students. I waved a bit, asked
students about their post-graduation plans, and engaged in other polite conversations. I even
managed to get in a few photos.

But deep down, I knew that I had failed on one of my two major goals before entering college. The
first goal, which I achieved, was to do well academically and get in a good graduate school in the
sciences. I did that, and while I never thought my field would be computer science, somehow I made
it. It doesn't hurt that computer science is a pretty hot field now.

My second goal was to *make close friends*.

Not acquaintances. Not one-and-done homework buddies.  Not people with whom our communication would
derive primarily from exchanging Facebook posts.

*Real, close friends*, people who I could count on for the highest-priority social events, people
who I could comfortably hang out with outside of the college realm, people who I could *really
trust*.

I was concerned about making friends before entering Williams, since I had been unable to do that in
high school. (Most people from the high school who I stay in touch with nowadays are those who I
would have known even if I had not gone to my high school.) To be fair, I was reasonably friendly
with students from the Deaf and Hard of Hearing classroom in my high school, but my attempts to
extend this to hearing students did not succeed. Given that I was the only deaf student at Williams,
I was concerned.

Despite a lack of social skills, my first semester at Williams actually exceeded my expectations.
For one of the few times in my life, I was surrounded by brilliant, talented students my age who
were also extremely eager to get to know each other. During the first few weeks, I couldn't believe
how many times people would come up to me, unprompted, to say hello, relieving me of the burden to
start an awkward conversation. My goodness, where was this my entire life?

Unfortunately, as the months, semesters, and years went on at Williams, I gradually realized that I
was missing out on close friendships. I would occasionally find homework collaborators, gym
partners, and irregular eating groups.

But when it came to the "real" social events, I was out.

Like in most colleges, Friday and Saturday nights are prime social hours at Williams, the times when
students stick with their closest friends to go out to eat, have a party, or to just hang out
(hopefully doing nothing illegal, but never mind). I usually spent Friday and Saturday nights in the
computer science laboratory or in my dorm room. It's not that I was turning down party invitations
-- I didn't *get* them.

When I wandered around campus during these times, I regularly walked by large groups of hollering
students, some of them drunk. I'm not going to lie -- I *really, really* wished I could have been
part of some of those groups, enjoying myself in the company of friends (but without the drunk
part). I dreamed about this, replaying hypothetical social situations in my mind and pretending that
I was the popular person in the center of the crowd, leading the group to their destination.

Unfortunately, the reality was that during the few times I was lucky enough to be with a group of
students late at night, I generally did not enjoy those experiences. The reason is obvious. When the
other students talked, I was unable to understand what they were saying. If I were *really* popular,
it *might* be possible to have students who act as personal translators, but that was not the case.

It didn't help that I had what I would call a "friendship ranking" problem. I could form a ranking
of the top ten Williams students with whom I was friendliest.  But I don't think any of them would
have me at a comparable rank on their lists; I would probably be around ten spots lower. Thus,
during the prime social hours, those high-ranking students would socialize with people on top of
*their* hypothetical friendship list.  It's what a rational human being would do. And, admittedly,
I didn't have much courage to ask people to do things together. I worried that I wouldn't be able to
understand what they said, or that I would inconvenience them.

During my second year at Williams, I had a series of stressful and unpleasant experiences in groups
and parties. I consistently ran into the problem of being unable to hear what students said in group
situations.  Starting in my junior year, I resolved to never attend parties again. I was sick of
showing up to these events myself, watching people roar and laugh at something mysterious, and then
walking back to my dorm room by myself.

For a while, simply ignoring these events worked. I sometimes had nagging thoughts that I *really
was* missing out on lots of fun and friendship, but for a while, I could hold thoughts about
isolation and friendship at bay.

The Fall 2013 semester was when my mental barrier broke. My isolation truly began to hit home, and
to make matters worse, it came during an incredibly stressful time of my life, when I had to write
graduate school applications and work on research. During the start of that semester, my isolation
consumed me. I constantly thought about it when I was completing homework, sitting in class
lectures, eating by myself, and doing other activities. I was unable to focus in class and had
trouble sleeping. I soon had enough of it, and left the campus for a weekend to recharge at home and
to talk with an external counselor.

During the winter break, since my family lives within driving distance from the college, I remained
at home, with the occasional foray to campus if I had a thesis meeting. I soon faced the reality
that, while I was home, I didn't get texts or messages from other students, asking where I was. I
felt that students didn't care about me.

I was disconnected from them.

Fortunately, the Fall 2013 (and winter 2014) debacle had a not-disastrous ending. Being away from
campus helped me mentally recover (but didn't help me make close friends). My grades were fine, and
I caught up on research in the following semester, Spring 2014. I also felt better once I had gotten
into more graduate schools than I expected, since I could [look forward to starting a new social
life at my next school][2], forever thinking about how to upgrade from "acquaintance" to "close
friend."

Despite feeling better in the spring, I still skipped all the major senior social dances, parties,
and events. No one asked me to go, and I did not know anyone who I could confidently ask to go with.

Ultimately, I have mixed feelings about my Williams experience: generally positive for academics,
generally negative for social.  I have not donated any money and don't plan to donate, though I
might change my mind later. After graduating, I knew *for sure* that I wanted the Fall 2013 semester
to *remain* the worst semester of my life. I had no desire to relive my constant concerns over
isolation.

But then, the Fall 2015 semester happened.


## Fall 2015

I'm going to refrain from a final statement as to which of these two semesters was worse.
Hopefully, after some more time passes, I can relax and judge the Fall 2015 semester with a clearer
mind, like how American presidents are often evaluated more favorably far beyond their presidency,
as compared to immediately after their last term. 

The Fall 2015 semester, however, currently holds the edge in the title of "worst semester ever".
The culprit, if you haven't figured it out already: *isolation*.

Almost all of my negative experiences, almost all of my sources of stress and depression, just like
at Williams, can be traced back to *that one single, simple concept*.

My "isolation thoughts" reappeared in the summer, an ominous sign of things to come.  During that
summer, I was alone in my lab room, which has six desks but (at that time) had only three students,
including me, and the other two had internships at Google and Microsoft. I can remember three times
when I was not, strictly speaking, alone there: when one of the two students took a break from his
internship to give me a much-needed "hello" while we had lunch (that day was great), when a random
Master's student came to install his computers in the room (but he never showed up again and I saw
someone else move his computers later), and when two students from another research group installed
a research computer in the lab (but their *real* office is in a different building).

Aside from those three cases, I can't think of another time when I spoke with anyone else near my
desk that summer. It should say a lot that I vividly remember these minor interactions (and what we
talked about), because deep, memorable interactions are hard to get.

As I [mentioned in another post with the prefix "Thoughts on Isolation"][3], the isolation I was
experiencing in the summer gradually consumed me and hindered my ability to do work and to study.
During the weeks before, during, and after my prelims (i.e., late August), I went through several
days that I would call "lost days." Here's the definition: a "lost day" is one when I show up to my
office at the usual time, stay there for eight to ten hours, but *do not make any progress at all on
work*, because my mind is consumed with thoughts on isolation.

Here's an example. Suppose I show up in the morning with the goal of understanding a dense,
technical paper that might help me with my research. I read a paragraph, but then have a thought
appear in my head: that there was a recently-published paper co-authored by three Berkeley graduate
students that was all the rage in research meetings. Then I get disappointed that somehow these
students got together and were able to -- presumably -- bounce ideas off of each other and
collaborate in creating a high-quality paper. I think: *Why can't I have that experience?* A minute
later, I shake this thought off of my head and realize that I have to read the paper in front of me.
Since I am distracted, I have start back at the paragraph I just "read." Unfortunately, after
re-reading that paragraph, *another* thought explodes in my mind. This time it's about something
different, perhaps I remember seeing three other graduate students eating lunch together. I think
about this, frustrated that I don't have a consistent eating partner, and then snap out of it
*again* to try and get back to reading. Of course, I have to start from the beginning of that same
paragraph, and so on ... 

These feedback loops were devastating, robbing me of any hope of making progress during those lost
days. I tried desperately to escape the loop: calling my parents, walking around campus, going to
cafes, lying down on the couch in the lab room, you name it.  But none of these were able to
completely get rid of the feedback loop.

If only I could make it to the prelims, I thought, then things would get better. Passing the prelims
would give me confidence that I needed to regain my research productivity. The start of the semester
meant that there would be more people around. Things would go better.

So much for that.

Despite an [impressive performance on the prelims][1], the Fall 2015 semester was a disaster.  If
anything, I felt *more* isolated compared to how I felt in the summer. I was bombarded with signs
that students were less isolated than me. I saw students in the same research group stick with each
other, working together or hanging out. The fall also brought a new wave of accepted research
papers, many of them involving groups of two or more graduate students and postdocs. It was hard to
avoid knowing about these papers, as the information is readily available. Sometimes these papers
are on graduate student homepages, but I try not to look at those anymore.

Looking at these groups of students, either together socially or together in a publication, made me
feel frustrated. I longed to be part of those groups. I wanted to break out of my cycle of
isolation. I wanted to feel happy looking at other people, not disappointed.

My mood did not recover from the summer. I would feel upset while sitting in class lectures, knowing
that I was different from the other students. I repeatedly got angry at myself during (and after)
lectures when I was unable to follow the sign language well enough to sufficiently understand what
lecturers were saying. I tried to reassure myself, knowing that I would spend nights and weekends
reading webpages and textbooks to catch up on the lecture material, but somehow that didn't make me
feel better.

There's something else that happened this semester. Something I've been trying not to think about
lately, without much success.

I would feel isolated and experience a *slight twinge* of resentment, whenever I heard, read, or
thought about "diversity in computer science." I kept thinking that "diversity" in the context of
computer science means getting more women and racial minorities involved (well, not all racial
minorities ...).

When I search online about "being black in computer science" or other similar queries, I see
[articles such as this recent one from Stanford][4]. One of the sections in that article says: *A
feeling of isolation*, and it describes isolation from being a racial minority.

Wait, let's read that again:

*A feeling of isolation*.

Oh, wow. You know, *that might just describe how I feel on a daily basis*. 

I kept thinking throughout the semester that, whenever the topic of diversity in computer science
comes up, it's assumed that Caucasian and Asian males, such as myself, have few issues getting along
with others and feeling included.

That is probably true for *most* of us, but I can state from personal experience that all the
attention towards making women and minorities feel more included in computer science makes me a
*little* frustrated. OK, sometimes more than "a little."

To be clear, I'm not saying that I don't have advantages from being a Caucasian and Asian male. I
have never been racially insulted, or sexually assaulted. If I had a different body type, those
aspects about my life might be different.

But on the other hand, suppose I were black and *hearing*. Then, wouldn't it be possible for me to
sit through a lecture and finally piece together a few consecutive sentences from the lecturer?
Wouldn't it be possible for me to follow the conversation in a rapidly-scheduled research meeting
with five people?

Wouldn't it be possible for me to *enjoy being in a group*?

I face challenges that are different from those of women and minorities, some of which will lead to
similar conclusions (i.e., isolation). Unfortunately, I don't feel like I have an outlet, some kind
of real support group of students who might help me. And people won't line up to hear *my* opinion.

Imagine me thinking about this over and over again. That was Fall 2015 in a nutshell.

I'm not saying that my first year at Berkeley was that great -- it wasn't -- but I never regularly
thought about how much I was *detesting* it here.

Eventually, as the semester progressed with more thoughts on isolation and a few more "lost days," I
finally tried to tell people *explicitly* that I needed help to combat isolation. That this semester
was just taking too much of a toll on me.  Earlier, I had told others that my graduate experience
wasn't that great, but I now had to downgrade it from "so-so" to "awful" to make things *clear*.

I don't want to place the blame on anyone in particular. I don't think there *is* anyone to blame,
except the "system" as a whole. I believe this because one thing that hurt me was failing to make it
*obvious* when I first arrived in Berkeley that (a) I was deaf, and (b) I needed help finding *real*
collaborators.

While I do feel like things can move at such a glacial pace, at least there are people here trying
to help me out. I'm extremely grateful to the ones who have not completely disregarded me, and have
given me the opportunity to -- as of today -- have much more collaboration than I have had in my
life. A new era begins now. I can't waste this opportunity.

So will my story have a happy ending? (Sigh) I don't know.


## Conclusion

By now, it should be clear that 2015 was not the greatest year for me. It started off *somewhat,
kind of, reasonably* well, but fell off a deep cliff during the summer and remained buried under a
Mount Everest-sized pile of stress during the Fall 2015 semester.

I *really* hope 2016 will go much better.

I'll keep this conclusion short. To everyone, my goodness, *Happy New Year*.


[1]:http://danieltakeshi.github.io/my-prelims/
[2]:http://danieltakeshi.github.io/my-wish-for-the-2015-2016-academic-year-a-true-student-collaborator/
[3]:http://danieltakeshi.github.io/2015-11-21-thoughts-on-isolation-how-often-do-students-work-together-on-homework/
[4]:http://www.stanforddaily.com/2015/01/16/addressing-ethnic-diversity-in-computer-science/
