---
layout:     post
title:      "Don't Worry about Walking in Between a Sign Language Conversation"
date:       2016-07-30 19:00:00
permalink:  2016/07/30/dont-worry-about-walking-in-between-a-sign-language-conversation/
---

Suppose there are two people [talking in sign language][1]. What should you do when you have to walk
in between them in order to reach your destination? If the people were talking *verbally* (say, in
English), you would walk through the two without hesitation.

But does sign language cause the etiquette to be different?

I thought about this recently when I was attending a recent tour. As part of it, the attendees
listened to a few talks in an auditorium. Since I had a sign language interpreter, I naturally sat
in the front corner seat of the room. Fortunately, I didn't play my usual role of the "human
repellent." Despite there being lots of empty seats, some of the other people *actually sat next to
me* instead of being afraid of the sign language and consequently sitting as far away from me as
possible. (I *hope* that's the reason why people generally don't sit next to me ...)

I didn't know anyone else in the tour, so during breaks within the talks, I would strike up some
conversations with the sign language interpreter. At the same time, a lot of the other attendees
needed to get up and walk to the back of the auditorium, presumably to fetch a new batch of
Starbucks coffee.  But this meant that many had to cut through me and the sign language interpreter.
Throughout the tour, I noticed two classes of people:

1. Those who walked through our conversation quickly and without hesitation.

2. Those who paused and nervously glanced at me and the interpreter, wondering about what to do.

I'm here to reassure you that (1) is much better than (2). If you need to walk between us to go
somewhere, please do it (quickly).

I think most people who engage in (2) are those who do not have much experience with sign language
and "deafness" more generally, so their reaction is certainly understandable (and a sign of
politeness, I might add). When this situation happens, usually the sign language interpreter will
quickly motion for the person to walk through, and then he or she will do a little sprint and then
continue walking.

Perhaps people are worried about some unknown rules of sign language etiquette? If so, don't worry:
I don't find walking between us to be rude at all, and I have yet to meet *anyone* who gets bothered
by this. It doesn't interfere with our conversation that much, because (just like in English audio)
if a second of the conversation (or audio) gets cut, we can usually fill in the details by means of
continuity, which comes with experience using the language.

If there's a *group* of people who have to walk between us, then it's a different story. When that
happens, we have to pause the sign language until everyone gets through, but that's understandable;
we don't want to be jerks and force everyone to take a far more roundabout route.

To state the obvious, though: if there's a way to get to your destination without cutting through
our conversation, you should consider that alternative route, but if that would require squeezing
between a twelve-inch gap between the wall of the auditorium and the back of my interpreter's chair
and making yourself look silly in the process, please don't do it. If you would walk between us
without hesitation if we were talking in English, then you can safely walk in between a sign
language conversation. That doesn't mean walk, then stop, examine your clothes, fiddle around, and
so forth.  If you take more than a second, you'll annoy us. Just act normally, please. That goes for
a lot of other things related to deafness that I've experienced in my life.

[1]:http://danieltakeshi.github.io/2014/05/31/speak-vs-use-asl/
