---
layout: post
title:  "Ava: Communication Beyond Barriers"
date:   2016-05-15 20:00:00
permalink: 2016-05-15-ava-communication-beyond-barriers/
---

On January 21, 2015, I saw an email in my inbox about an issue of *Berkeley Engineering*, which must
be some magazine published by the university every few months. I wasn't planning on reading it in
detail, but [one of the articles caught my eye][2]. It was about a former Berkeley graduate student,
Thibault Duchemin, who had just co-founded a company called Transcense (now named Ava) to break the
communication barrier that plagues hearing impaired people when we attempt to talk with hearing
people.  Their main product is an app that can perform automatic speech recognition, so a hearing
impaired person can look at his/her phone during a conversation and (hopefully) read the text to
understand what's going on.

Why did Thibault start the company? In part, it was because of his experience as a hearing person in
a deaf family. (That's rather unusual, since it's typically the case that there's a single deaf
person in a hearing family[^ironically].)

When I was reading this article, I kept thinking about the continued importance of automatic speech
recognition. Today, it is widely used in practice (as any avid Googler can tell) and is also a
popular research subfield in computer science. I wish I could do research in that area, but
unfortunately, I don't think people who do that kind of research would be interested in working with
me.

Needless to say, I wanted to know more, so I sent Thibault an email, and was pleasantly surprised to
get a fast response. We decided to meet in person at one of my favorite cafes, [Nefeli's Cafe][3],
located on the edge of the Berkeley campus. We chatted for about an hour in sign language.  I was
probably a little rusty, and there may have been some French versus English signing confusion, but
we understood what we were saying to each other.

I later met a few more people from Ava since I asked to stay in touch with them. Since my meeting
with Thibault, they've made enough progress on their product that it's currently in beta stage and
released to a specific audience. I recently tested it out with one of their other co-founders,
Pieter, and they've definitely made progress, though they need to hone out some of the bugs we found
during my session. They only have about nine people working for them so hopefully they will be able
to work hard to get the app in a useful stage. By the way, [here's the link their new website][1].

One might wonder how their product works. I don't know the details, but I think they use some of
Google's speech recognition software. It's possible to design your own automatic speech recognition
software (I did one for CS 288 using Hidden Markov Models) but it's definitely far easier to use one
that's already existing, rather than build a huge one from scratch, which would require a ridiculous
amount of data, and probably lots of neural network tweaking.

As I continue to fight daily doses of isolation, it's nice to think in the back of my mind that
there are people out there willing to work and help me.

***

[^ironically]: That doesn't apply to me, however.

[1]:http://www.ava.me/
[2]:http://engineering.berkeley.edu/2015/01/breaking-sound-barrier-deaf-communication
[3]:http://nefelicaffe.net/


