---
layout: post
title:  "Back to Blogging"
date:   2016-11-22 10:20:00
permalink: 2016/11/22/back-to-blogging/
---

Sorry for my silence in the last few weeks. I was completely preoccupied with
preparation for a technical interview, which took place yesterday. I have now
made public my [interview preparation repository (on GitHub)][1]. It contains my
code for some of the questions in the famous book *Cracking the Coding
Interview*, 5th edition. Yes, the 5th edition, not the 6th ... next time, I
really should pay more attention to the version numbers of books before jumping
the gun on buying them. But the 5th edition is still good, and I highly
recommend using a recent version of the book to anyone who needs to prepare for
a coding interview.

The repository only contains a fraction of what I wrote to prepare for the
interview. I also had to review a *lot* of data structures concepts that I
forgot. For instance, I *never* use linked lists in my research code (do *any*
AI researchers use linked lists?!?). Consequently, I kept a Google Document with
all of my typed notes from the Berkeley course, CS 61B.  The best iteration of
the class to review from is [the Spring 2014 version][2], since that's the most
recent version taught by Professor Shewchuk, who has wonderful lecture notes
publicly available. (Thank you so much!!)

There's also been some other stuff going on besides my interview preparation.
Most notable pertains to ... politics. I was, of course, disappointed with the
result at the federal level. I never thought that someone like Donald Trump
could possibly become President of the United States, and it's been painful for
me to observe this happen given how strongly I opposed his candidacy from the
start. I'm obviously not the only one here who opposed Trump; in the Berkeley
computer science department, the faculty and students are nearly *unanimously*
opposed to him, which says a lot given how computer science is supposed to be a
nonpolitical field (as opposed to say, economics or political science). I am not
aware of a single strong Trump supporter in the entire department, though I
would not be surprised if we had a few of them (who are remaining quiet, for
now).

While thinking about Trump's rise to the highest elected office in the world, I
began to fantasize *myself* being in his position. (Yes, I know it will never
happen, so you don't have to remind me.) What would a hypothetical *Seita*
administration look like? I think it would be interesting to lay down some
thoughts in a future blog post about the major positions I would take, and what
issues would be important to me. Fighting climate change and radical Islamic
terrorism come to mind. Hopefully I can write this up in detail over the
December/January holiday break.

Then again, maybe it's better for my education and my sanity if I stick to
technical/research posts.  Who knows?


[1]:https://github.com/DanielTakeshi/Interview_Practice
[2]:https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~jrs/61b/
