---
layout: post
title:  "Donald Trump Should Not be Our Next President"
date:   2016-10-08 20:00:00
permalink: 2016/10/08/2016/donald-trump-should-not-be-our-next-president/
---

I hope Americans can collectively react with disgust to the latest news about
Donald Trump and his incendiary comments. This time, it's a particularly
lewd conversation with Billy Bush[^cousin] where Trump brags about his sexual
exploits. You can read about it [from the Washington Post][1] and watch the
video there.

I haven't watched the video, because I already knew that I was not supporting
Trump, but I hope that this is the nail in the coffin for his campaign. So far,
politicians such as Senators John McCain and Kelly Ayotte have [*finally*
rescinded their support for Trump][2]. Finally.

Unlike many of the Republican politicians now denouncing Trump, I was against
him from *day one* of his campaign, when he labeled Mexicans as criminals and
rapists. As the campaign went on, Trump continued to turn me off by mocking a
disabled reporter, saying that a "Mexican" judge couldn't do his job, belittling
the parents of a Muslim solder, praising Putin[^putin], and (obviously) making
numerous disparaging comments about women.

Now, yes, people make mistakes about things they say, and *a lot* of men are
insensitive when talking about women.  Heck, I remember in eighth grade when
another student flipped through our school yearbook and told me to state the
girls I liked. Did I make certain comments then that I now regret?  Yes.

But the difference is that I have now matured and learned to be more respectful
to others.  As a consequence, I cannot remember a single instance in the last
eight years when I made a disparaging comment about a woman's body, and I have
no plans to do so in the future.

Trump was 59 years old when he made these comments, and he has shown no signs of
changing or improving his demeanor.

As a Democrat-leaning voter, I can probably be expected to oppose Trump, but the
truth is that I want to have two healthy political parties in this country to
give me two healthy options.  The Republican party used to nominate reasonable,
competent men such as George H.W. Bush, who understood the power of the free
market, who knew how to judiciously use military, who did not deny climate
change, and who cared about people with disabilities. That era, sadly, seems to
be gone.

I am endorsing Hillary Clinton for President. Whether or not I *directly* vote
for her on my absentee ballot depends on whether the [vote-swapping][3] service
I signed up for follows through. If I get paired up with a third party voter in
a swing state, then I'll vote for whoever that person wants (along with, of
course, the condition that the other person votes for Clinton). If I don't hear
back from the vote swapping service, I will just go ahead and explicitly vote
for Clinton.

As for other elections that happen now and in the future, I will be applying a
simple litmus test for any candidate who I may elect: has that person ever given
support to Trump's presidency? If so, then I will not be voting for that person.
Once that filters out the candidates, I can then focus on the real issues that
matter.

Ultimately, Hillary Clinton was not my first choice[^not_socialist] for
President. I do not believe she will help reduce the political correctness in
this country. I support the Trans-Pacific Partnership and hope that she will
reconsider her opposition. I have some reservations about her tenure as
Secretary of State. And I feel ignored when she and other Democrats cater to
African American, Hispanic American, and women voters.

But at this stage, we are down to two major candidates and must decide among the
better of the two (or the "least awful" if you wish). And for me, that choice is
abundantly clear.

***

[^cousin]: Apparently, he's a cousin of former President George W. Bush. Interesting ...

[^putin]: Putin, by the way, is someone who I view even *more* negatively than
    Trump. If there was somehow a Putin versus Trump election in the United
    States (oh no ...), I would grind my teeth and vote for Trump. But let's
    hope that never happens.

[^not_socialist]: I am not a socialist, so Bernie Sanders was also not my first
    choice. Of the major candidates, I think I would consider Michael Bloomberg
    as my top choice (if he counts as one...).

[1]:https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-lewd-conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html?tid=pm_pop_b
[2]:http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/08/29/us/politics/at-least-110-republican-leaders-wont-vote-for-donald-trump-heres-when-they-reached-their-breaking-point.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=image&module=b-lede-package-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news
[3]:http://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/?p=2891
